.TH BOOM 1 "September 2023" Linux "Boom Manual"


.SH NAME

boom - scheme (r5rs) jit

.SH SYNOPSIS

\fBboom\fR [\fIoptions\fR] \fIscript.[scm|bc]\fR ...

.SH "WEB SITE"

https://github.com/djwatson/boom


.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBboom\fR is a vm (virtual machine) and jit compiler (just-in-time) for the scheme
language, report version r5rs.  It can run scripts directly, or pre-compile them
to an executable.


.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "--joff"
  Turn off the jit compiler, only use the bytecode VM.
.TP
.BI "-m, --max-trace=\fINUMBER\fR"
  Only trace up to \fINUMBER\fR traces, and then only interpret.
.TP
.BI "--dump"
  Turn on debugging dumps for gdb and linux perf tool.
.TP
.BI "-l, --list"
  Compile the script and dump the resulting code in human-readable
  format to stdout, and then quit.
.TP
.BI "-p, --profile"
  Turn on the bytecode profiler.  After the script finishes,
  statistics gathered are printed to stdout.
.TP
.BI "--exe"
  Compile the script in to an exe by linking it with libboom_exe.
  Note that this is no faster than running a `.bc` file directly
  with boom, and is only a convenience.  Script is only compiled
  and not run.
.TP
.BI "-s, --heap-sz=\fINUMBER\fR"
  Set the maximum heap size, in pages (4096 bytes).  Default is 12000 pages.
.TP
.BI "-v, --verbose"
  Turn on verbosity.  Prints tracing info, generated trace IR, and
  machine code.  Also displays GC collection info.
.TP
.BI "-h, --help"
  Print help message and exit.

.PP
After all options are processed, the given script is run.
Currently boom does not support an interactive mode.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
$ boom hello.scm

Prints 'hello world', assuming hello.scm contains
.br
  (display "hello world")
.PP
$ boom --exe hello.scm
.br
$ hello

 Compiles the hello.scm script to an executable
  
.SH COPYRIGHT

\fBboom\fR is Copyright \(co 2023 Dave Watson.
.br
\fBboom\fR is open source software, released under the MIT license.

.SH AUTHOR

Dave Watson <dade.watson@gmail.com>




